Herbal medicine and treatment with herbs are not new to humanity, and it has been in practice since thousands of years back and still going on. Both the developed and developing countries are now focusing on the treatment based on herbal medicine because of its several benefits. India is the country of herbs, and the Indian traditional treatment system was also based on herbs and medicinal plant that is known as Ayurveda. India is the well-known mine of well recorded herbal plants with their medicinal use. Herbal medicine is also called botanical medicines or phytomedicine. In a survey report of the World Health Organization, it was found that the 80% population of the world rely on traditional herbal medicine for primary health-care need. In fact in developed countries, alternative medicine is gaining popularity and it is increasing day by day because of their efficacy, safety, and lesser side effects. Herbal drugs possess a long history of its application and better patient tolerance on their application. This review article discusses the limitation and challenges faced for the production of herbal medicine. Medicinal plants have been utilized for a large number of years to flavour and preserve food, to treat wellbeing issue and to avoid illnesses including epidemics. The information of their healing properties has been transmitted throughout the hundreds of years within and among human groups. Lead compounds produced during secondary metabolism are typically in charge of the natural properties of plant species utilized all through the globe for different purposes, including treatment of irresistible infections. Right now, information on the antimicrobial activity of various plants, so far considered observational, have been scientifically confirmed, with the increasing number of reports on pathogenic microorganisms resistant to antimicrobials. Substances got from plants may possibly control microbial development in diverse circumstances and in the particular instance of ailment treatment, various studies have intended to depict the chemical composition of these plant antimicrobials and the mechanisms required in microbial development hindrance, either independently or connected with conventional antimicrobials.